[Music]
now listen up my very eager mother just
served us nine pizzas Oh YUM hey if you
were in elementary school before 2006
there's a good chance you had to
memorize something similar to that
sentence this mnemonic device was used
to teach children the order of the
planets in our solar system Mercury
Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus
also pronounced Uranus yeah you can't
hide from it either way and finally
Neptune and Pluto now if you're
currently in elementary school you might
be saying wait there were nine planets
before going back to playing fortnight
go or whatever kids are into these days
so what happened to Pluto it's not like
it's gone anywhere it's still out there
on the edge of the solar system as cold
and far away as ever so what changed
well Pluto hasn't but our understanding
of it has we know way more about space
than we did 100 years ago Pluto itself
was only discovered in 1930 so it's not
like the planet lineup hasn't been
modified before still that doesn't
change the fact that there's something
inherently strange about a planet being
demoted who even knew that was a thing
that could happen hey what do you think
should Pluto be a planet or is it right
where it belongs give me your opinion in
the comments things might get a little
clearer once we figure out what the word
planet means the exact definition has
changed a lot over time but from the age
of Galileo to the 19th century it
referred to any object orbiting the Sun
this might seem a little vague but work
perfectly well until the Year 1801 that
was the year astronomers discovered
Ceres a planet in massive air quotes
orbiting the Sun halfway between Mars
and Jupiter you might recognize this as
where the asteroid belt is and it isn't
because Ceres pulled an alder on and
broke into a thousand pieces if it had
I'm pretty sure kids would pay a lot
more attention in science class
anyway astronomers noticed right away
that Ceres was quite small with only
half the radius of Earth's moon
the year after Ceres discovery the
Astronomy community was abuzz with the
discovery of another planet named Pallas
then they found another a few years
later and another and another and I
think you see where this was going for
new planets are one thing well four
things but you get the idea when it
turns into thousands it might be time to
reevaluate some definitions astronomers
noticed that the rocks had more in
common with each other than any of the
other planets they were tiny they were
barren and the vast majority weren't
even spherical these small objects
became known as the asteroids in the
asteroid belt and the world went back to
learning the seven planets Mercury Venus
Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn and Uranus
Uranus whatever
Neptune made eight in 1846 with Pluto
joining the party 84 years later with
the benefit of hindsight it might be
easy to guess that Pluto would go down
the same path as its long-lost cousin
series but we all know what they say
about hindsight and there are things we
know about Pluto now that weren't
obvious in the early 20th century for
example well we know Pluto is nothing
more than a tiny ball of ice and rock
initial measurements gave it a similar
size to Uranus or Uranus and Neptune
Pluto size was revised down to that of
the earth a year after its discovery in
1948 it shrank again it would keep
shrinking until astronomers were finally
able to get an accurate measurement in
2006 we now know that Pluto is only one
450 ninth the size of Planet Earth
making it smaller than the moon and only
about twice the size of the former
planet Ceres Pluto's planet status was
in trouble long before that however in
1978 astronomers discovered Pluto's moon
Charon at first this might seem to be
strong evidence in Pluto's favor if it's
big enough to have a satellite it must
be a planet right
well not exactly Sharon may be smaller
than Pluto but not that much smaller
when half the diameter might seem like a
big difference but not compared to the
differences in size between the other
planets and their moons in fact they're
similar enough in mass for Charon to
noticeably affect Pluto's orbit around
the Sun causing it to wobble to and fro
as it travels through space that's some
very unplan --it like behavior and it
led more than a few astronomers to feel
uncomfortable about using that word to
describe Pluto and they got even less
comfortable every time a new Pluto like
object was discovered beyond Neptune's
orbit still Pluto had been on the list
for decades at this point so not
everyone was ready or willing to give it
the boot all that changed with the
discovery of Eris in 2005 while Eris is
slightly smaller than Pluto initial
measurements placed it as somewhat more
massive this added one more strike
against Pluto status as a planet and in
2006 the International Astronomical
Union decided it was once again time to
revise their definition of what is or is
not a planet from then on an object was
only a planet if it fit the following
three qualifications first it must orbit
around the Sun number two is that the
object must be a sphere or at least
nearly so Pluto checks the first two
boxes but runs into trouble with number
three which says a planet must have
cleared the neighborhood around it
clearing its neighborhood means that
there are no nearby objects other than
its own satellites Pluto has failed to
accomplish that feat so the third box
remains unchecked one strike might be
okay in baseball but it's a deal breaker
if you're trying to stay on the
exclusive list for club planet now not
everyone was thrilled to find out Pluto
got to kick down it's not hard to feel
bad for the little guy and even today
there are a few scientists who disagree
with the IU's ruling and want to call
Pluto a planet once more
they propose that the first and third
qualifier be removed under this
definition any object with enough mass
to maintain a spherical or nearly
spherical shape would qualify as a
planet while this would let Pluto back
in it would also let in our moon as well
as several of the moons of Jupiter
Saturn and Neptune that's not to mention
Ceres Charon and a whole bunch of
asteroids and other objects all combined
this new definition would take us from a
manageable eight planets to an unwieldy
115 now the current definition is far
from perfect as some astronomers have
pointed out it excludes rogue planets
not orbiting any star some feel it also
puts too much emphasis on what surrounds
the perspective planet instead of the
world's themselves to quote Ethan Siegel
from medium.com
mercury at the distance of Jupiter would
never clear its orbit and wouldn't
obtain planetary status a world much
smaller than Mercury could be a planet
around a red dwarf star while even earth
would fail to be a planet if it were out
in the Oort cloud somewhere on the other
hand what do you do about stars such as
Proxima Centauri a red dwarf star that
orbits the larger and brighter Alpha
Centauri a and B is this a planet it
fulfills all the requirements even
though it's unquestionably a star can
you be a star in a planet at the same
time conventional wisdom says no but
this is the problem you run into when
trying to define words like planet all
of this might indicate that it may be
about time to take another look at how
we define planets that said increasing
the number by a factor of 14 doesn't
sound like a great solution whatever
definition science eventually settles on
sadly Pluto probably won't be on it oh
and we didn't even talk about how Pluto
was named after that Disney dog oh wait
he wasn't shucks
never mind hey if you learn something
new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and
member stay on the bright side of life